Angevin Empire
Introduction
Angevin empire,  the territories, extending in the latter part of the 12th century from Scotland to the Pyrenees, that were ruled by the English king Henry II and his immediate successors, Richard I and John; they were called the Angevin kings because Henry's father was count of Anjou. Henry acquired most of his continental possessions before becoming king of England. By inheritance through his mother (King Henry I's daughter, Matilda), he became duke of Normandy in 1150; he succeeded his father as count of Anjou, Maine, and Touraine in 1151; and in 1152, by marrying Eleanor of Aquitaine, he acquired that duchy, together with Gascony, Poitou, and Auvergne. Brittany, first conquered by Henry I in 1113, was finally brought into the Angevin "empire" when Henry II's son Geoffrey, who had married the heiress of Duke Conan IV, succeeded as duke of Brittany in 1171. Although all these lands were fiefs, held of the king of France, their concentration in one man's hands was a serious threat to the French monarchy, which had direct control of a much smaller area of land. As king of England from 1154, Henry had direct rule over all England and southern Wales, and suzerainty over the principality of Gwynedd in northern Wales. In 1171 he annexed Ireland and obtained direct control of the eastern part of the island and nominal control of the remainder. Finally, from 1174 to 1189, William I the Lion, king of Scotland, captured in a skirmish in 1174, was obliged to accept Henry as his overlord.

Henry's plans to divide his "empire" among his sons led to many quarrels and wars, which the French king eagerly fostered. Only Richard and John survived their father's death (1189), and although John was confirmed as lord of Ireland, which he had held since 1177, he was subject to Richard, who otherwise held all his father's possessions. Early in John's reign (1199-1216) the French king Philip II Augustus wrested from him Normandy, Anjou, Maine, and Touraine. By the Treaty of Paris (1259) the English retained only the duchy of Guyenne (a much-reduced vestige of Aquitaine, with Gascony). Its confiscation in 1337, together with an English claim to the French throne, led to the outbreak of the Hundred Years' War, by the end of which England retained in France only Calais, which was finally lost in 1558.

Location
The Angevin Empire was located in Scotland and the Pyrenees.

Spanning of the Area
The Plantagenets ruled over an area stretching from the Pyrenees to Ireland during the 12th and early 13th centuries, located north of the kingdoms of Navarre and Aragon. At its largest extent, the Angevin Empire consisted of the Kingdom of England, the Lordship of Ireland, the duchies of Normandy, Gascony and Aquitaine as well as of the Counties of Anjou, Poitou, Maine, Touraine, Saintonge, Marche, Périgord, Limousin, Nantes and Quercy. 

However, despite the extent of Plantagenet rule, his son John, King of England was defeated by Philip II of France of the House of Capet, which left the empire split in two, having lost the provinces of Normandy and Anjou. This defeat, after which the ruling Plantagenets retained their English territories and the French province of Gascony, set the scene for the Saintonge War and the Hundred Years' War.


Capital
The capital of the Republic of Angevin was Angers.

Language
The language of the Angevin Empire was English and French. The ruling class was French speaking.

Religion
The religion of the Angevin Empire was Roman Catholicism.

Emperors

Historical Era
The historical era of the Angevin Empire was from the 11th century to the 12th century.

Population 
The population of France nearly doubled between the late 10th and 12th centuries, an augmentation from 5 to 9.2 million inhabitants.

Currency
The currency of the Angevin Empire was the Solidus coin.

History
Origin
The Angevin Empire was more of a commonwealth than an empire because of it being an assemblage of seven fully independent, sovereign states loosely bound to each other. The Counts of Anjou had been vying for power in northwestern France for a long time. The counts were recurrent enemies of the Dukes of Normandy and of the Dukes of Brittany and sometimes even of the French King himself. Fulk IV, Count of Anjou claimed rule over Touraine, Maine and Nantes; however, of these only Touraine proved to be effectively ruled, as the construction of the castles of Chinon, Loches and Loudun exemplify. Fulk IV married his son Fulk, King of Jerusalem, called "Fulk the Younger", to Ermengarde, Countess of Maine, heiress of the province of Maine, thus unifying it with Anjou. While the dynasty of the Angevins was successful, their rivals, the Normans, had conquered England, while the Ramnulfids or Poitevins had become Dukes of Aquitaine as well as Vasconia and the Count of Blois became the Count of Champagne.

Rise of the Empire
In 1066, William Duke of Normandy conquered England, creating a channel straddling state with a large amount of lords holding land in both. Over the next century English kings would fight to hold and extend this land. In 1125 King Henry I of England made his only surviving legitimate child heir. She was soon married to Geoffrey Plantagenet, the heir to Anjou. 
When Henry died Matilda and Geoffrey were quarrelling with him, and the latter's nephew - Stephen of Blois - was able to seize the English throne, in no small part due to getting there first. Civil war followed between supporters of Stephen and English lords who remained loyal to the oath they'd sworn to Matilda, and while Matilda fought in England Geoffrey - now Geoffrey of Anjou - stayed on the continent to fight over their lands there. In 1150 Geoffrey gave his son Henry power, an act which was soon followed by King Louis VII of France - the theoretical overlord of all the counties and dukedoms the rivals to the English throne held on the continent - recognizing Henry as Duke. 
When Geoffrey died, Henry inherited Anjou and a claim to England and Normandy. In 1152 Louis VII divorced Eleanor of Aquitaine, ruler of a vast duchy, and within eight weeks Henry had married her. In 1153 Henry and Stephen agreed to terms, and when Stephen died a year later Henry became King of England as Henry II. Within a short space of time Henry had acquired a vast area of Britain and France, ruling some regions, such as England and Normandy, through himself, and Aquitaine through his wife. It made Henry one of the most powerful men in Europe. 

King Henry
The history of the English people would have been a great and a noble history whatever king had ruled over the land seven hundred years ago. But the history as we know it, and the mode of government which has actually grown up among us is in fact due to the genius of the great king by whose will England was guided from 1154 to 1189. He was a foreign king who never spoke the English tongue, who lived and moved for the most part in a foreign camp, surrounded with a motley host of Brabancons and hirelings; and who in intervals snatched from foreign wars hurried for a few months to his island-kingdom to carry out a policy which took little heed of the great moral forces that were at work among the people. It was under the rule of a foreigner such as this, however, that the races of conquerors and conquered in England first learnt to feel that they were one. It was by his power that England, Scotland, and Ireland were brought to some vague acknowledgment of a common suzerain lord, and the foundations laid of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. It was he who abolished feudalism as a system of government, and left it little more than a system of land-tenure. 
It was he who defined the relations established between Church and State, and decreed that in England churchman as well as baron was to be held under the Common law. It was he who preserved the traditions of self-government which had been handed down in borough and shire-moot from the earliest times of English history. 
His reforms established the judicial system whose main outlines have been preserved to our own day. It was through his "Constitutions" and his "Assizes" that it came to pass that over all the world the English-speaking races are governed by English and not by Roman law. It was by his genius for government that the servants of the royal household became transformed into Ministers of State. 
It was he who gave England a foreign policy which decided our continental relations for seven hundred years. The impress which the personality of Henry II left upon his time meets us wherever we turn. The more clearly we understand his work, the more enduring does his influence display itself even upon the political conflicts and political action of our own days.

Growth (Formation and Expansion)
Henry now fought to extend his lands, taking regions which included Brittany and some of Ireland. Henry decided he would divide his lands between his four sons - Anjou, Normandy and England for Henry, Aquitaine for Richard, Brittany for Geoffrey and Ireland for John, but the sons argued. Henry and Geoffrey would die before Henry II, but Richard and John came to an agreement and opposed their father, breaking him. Richard inherited much of the Angevin Empire, and ruled still more through his mother, but then went on crusade. When Richard was captured on the return journey, enemies on the continent attacked the empire's lands, led by Philip II of France. When Richard was finally released he fought and re-conquered most of the Angevin lands, but was killed while on campaign.

Expansions of Empire by Country
France
Henry II bought Vernon and Neuf-Marché back in 1154. This new strategy now regulated the Plantagenet-Capetian relationship. Louis VII could not deny his own unsuccessful attempt at breaking Henry II down. Because of the Angevin control of England in 1154, it was pointless to object to the superiority of the overall Angevin forces over the Capetian ones. However, Henry II wouldn't stop claiming the land until the Norman Vexin was entirely recovered. Thomas Becket was sent as ambassador to Paris in 1158 to lead negotiations and he displayed all the wealth the Angevins could provide to the Capetians.
Flanders
England traded much of its wool with Flanders via the port of Boulogne. An alliance with these two counties was then logically sealed by this wedding and the concessions of manors. Henry II had to get Marie out of her convent first, which had been a common practice in England since the Normans. In 1163, the few official remaining documents showed Henry II and Thierry renewed the treaty signed by William the Conqueror. Flanders would provide Henry II with knights in exchange of an annual tribute in money.
Brittany
In 1156, the Duchy of Brittany was hit by civil unrest which led to Conan IV's accession while in Nantes the population called for Henry II's help against Hoël. Geoffrey (Henry II's brother again) was made new Count of Nantes by Henry II, but he did not hold the position for long, as he died in 1158 at only 24 years of age. In 1158, Conan IV briefly ruled as Count of Nantes however, Henry II took the title that same year by mustering an army in Avranches to threaten Conan. Without a tradition of a strong rule in Brittany, discontent grew among the nobles. Breton nobles strongly opposed this, and more attacks on Brittany followed, first in 1167, then in 1168, and finally in 1173. Each of these invasions were followed by confiscations, and Henry II installed his men, William Fitzhamo and Rolland of Dinan, in the area. Although it was not formally part of the Plantagenet fiefdom, Brittany was under firm control.
Scotland
William the Lion, the next King of Scotland, was unhappy with Henry II since he was given Northumberland by David I in 1152 and therefore lost it to Henry II when Malcolm IV handed it back in 1157.
As a part of the coalition set by Louis VII, William the Lion first invaded Northumberland in 1173 and then again in 1174, as a result he was captured near Alnwick and had to sign the tough Treaty of Falaise. Garrisons were to be set in the castles of Edinburgh, Roxburgh, Jedburgh and Berwick. Southern Scotland was from then under firm control just as Brittany was. Richard I of England would end the Treaty of Falaise in exchange for money to fund his own crusade, setting a context for cordial relationships between the two awe- inspiring kings.
Wales
Rhys of Deheubarth, also called Lord Rhys, and Owain Gwynedd were closed to negotiations. Henry II had to attack Wales three times, in 1157, 1158 and 1163 to have them answer his summons to the court. The Welsh found his terms too harsh and largely revolted against him. Henry then undertook a fourth invasion in 1164, this time with a massive army. Wales remained safe for a while, but the invasion of Ireland in 1171 pressured Henry II to end the issue through negotiations with Lord Rhys.
Ireland
Henry II didn't give up on the conquest of Ireland. In 1167 -Dermot of Leinster- an Irish King, was recognised as "prince of Leinster" by Henry II and was allowed to recruit soldiers in England and Wales to use in Ireland against the other Kings. The knights first met great success in carving themselves lands in Ireland, so much it worried Henry II enough to land himself in Ireland in October 1171 near Waterford and confronted to such demonstration of power most native kings of Ireland recognized him as their lord. He also gave unconquered kingdoms such as Cork, Limerick and Ulster to his men and left the Normans carving their lands in Ireland. In 1177 he made John, his son, the first Lord of Ireland, though John was too young and landed in Ireland only in 1185. He failed to install his authority on the land and had to return to Henry II.
Toulouse
In June 1159 Henry II gathered in Poitiers what probably was the biggest army he had ever sent, formed by troops from all of his fiefdom, that army also included reinforcements sent by Thierry and Malcolm IV. Henry II attacked from the north while other of his allies, namely the Trencavels and Ramon Berenguer opened a different front. Henry II captured Cahors though as well as various castles in the Garonne valley (in the Quercy region), he came back in 1161 and then too busy with conflicts elsewhere in his fiefdom he left his allies fighting against Toulouse. Alfonso II the King of Aragon himself having interests there joined the war. In 1171 Henry II set an alliance with Humbert of Maurienne adding one more enemy of Raymond V to his alliance. In 1173, in Limoges, Raymond finally gave up after over a decade of constant fights.

Decline and Fall
King John took over in England following Richard's death, but other claimants surfaced on the continent. John had to fight to regain the land, giving territorial concessions while he did so. John now married Isabella of Angouleme, who had been betrothed to Hugh of Lusignan. The latter felt snubbed by John and appealed to the French king, leading to a power struggle between the thrones of England and France which saw Philip II declare all John's continental lands forfeit in 1202. John again fought to keep his land, but he was beaten and by 1204 the Angevin Empire was overrun. The struggle continued, but by 1259 Henry III of England had to renounce his claim to Normandy, Anjou and Poitou. 

Important Wars
Henry's elder son, Richard I (reigned 1189-99), fulfilled his main ambition by going on crusade in 1190, leaving the ruling of England to others. 
After his victories over Saladin at the siege of Acre and the battles of Arsuf and Jaffa, concluded by the treaty of Jaffa (1192), Richard was returning from the Holy Land when he was captured in Austria. In early 1193, Richard was transferred to Emperor Henry VI's custody.
In Richard's absence, King Philip of France failed to obtain Richard's French possessions through invasion or negotiation. 
In England, Richard's brother John occupied Windsor Castle and prepared an invasion of England by Flemish mercenaries, accompanied by armed uprisings. Their mother, Queen Eleanor, took firm action against John by strengthening garrisons and again exacting oaths of allegiance to the king.
John's subversive activities were ended by the payment of a crushing ransom of 150,000 marks of silver to the emperor, for Richard's release in 1194. Warned by Philip's famous message 'look to yourself, the devil is loosed', John fled to the French court. 
On his return to England, Richard was crowned at Winchester in 1194. Five years later he died in France during a minor siege against a rebellious baron. By the time of his death, Richard had recovered all his lands. 
His success was short-lived. In 1199 his brother John became king and Philip successfully invaded Normandy. By 1203, John had retreated to England, losing his French lands of Normandy and Anjou by 1205.
The Third Crusade
Before leaving, Richard I had to make sure nothing went wrong while he was in the Holy Land. There was little doubt Raymond V would take the opportunity to expand his lands in Aquitaine. To counter that threat, he built an alliance with Sancho VI the Wise the King of Navarre. On the way to the Holy Land, Richard I married Berengaria the princess of Navarre in 1191, therefore repudiating Alys. To calm down Philip II, he accepted that if he had two sons the youngest should take Normandy or Aquitaine or Anjou and rule it for the King of France. 
The administration left behind worked rather well, as an attack from the Count of Toulouse was repelled with the help of Sancho VI. The Siege of Acre was over. 
Richard I left Palestine in October 1192 and would have retrieved his lands intact had he reached home in time. But Leopold V arrested him near Vienna, accusing him of the murder of his cousin Conrad, and then handed him down to Emperor Henry VI. John Lackland was summoned to Philip II's court and accepted to marry Alys with no less than Artois has a dowry. In return, the entire Norman Vexin would be given to the King of France. After all, no one was sure if Richard I would be ever released. Yet, all of the forces John could gather were a bunch of mercenaries as even William the Lion did not join his revolt and also sent money for Richard's ransom. Another revolt in Aquitaine was suppressed by Elias de la Celle, but in Normandy Philip II himself was leading the operations. 
By April 1193 he had reached Rouen and although the ducal capital couldn't be taken, he and his allies were then controlling all the ports from the Rhine to Dieppe. Confronted to the situation, Richard's regents conceded the Treaty of Mantes in July 1193, confirming Philip II's control on all the land he had taken including the entire Norman Vexin, the castles of Drincourt and Arques in Normandy and the castles of Loches and Châtillon in Tourraine as well as adding a substantial payment once Richard is back.
In a new treaty in 1194, concessions to the King of France went much further, when Tours with all the castles of Tourraine and all of Eastern Normandy except for Rouen were surrendered. The County of Angoulême was declared independent of Aquitaine, Vendôme was given to Louis of Blois and Geoffrey III of Perche acquired Moulins and Bonmoulins. Emperor Henry VI finally released Richard I in 1194 in exchange of the ransom.

Culture
Economy
The economy of the Angevin Empire was quite complicated due to the varying political structure of the fiefdoms. Areas like England which had a centralised power structure generated larger revenues than the more loosely administrated regions such as Limousin; where local princes could mint their own coins. Due to the high level of administration of England and, to a lesser extent, Normandy, it was the only area where revenue was fairly consistent. The English revenues themselves varied from year to year.
The Captain's kings did not record such incomes, although the royal principality was more centralized under Louis VII and Philip II than it had been under Hugh Capet or Robert the Pious. The wealth of the Plantagenet kings was definitely regarded as bigger, Gerald of Wales commented on this wealth with these words.
One may therefore ask how King Henry II and his sons, in spite of their many wars, possessed so much treasure. The reason is that as their fixed returns yielded less they took care to make up the total by extraordinary levies, relying more and more on these than on the ordinary sources of revenue.

Religion
The Third Crusade
The Angevins were known to be devout and zealous religious people. Participants in the third crusade (1190-1192) took part under the command of Richard I in a three-year campaign to recover Palestine from Saladin, ruler of Syria and Egypt. Originating in the Angevin dominions of England, Normandy, and Aquitaine, they fought alongside contingents from the Holy Roman Empire, the kingdom of France, Denmark, and Italy.

Cuisine
French
In French medieval cuisine, banquets were common among the aristocracy. Multiple courses would be prepared, but served all at once. Food was generally eaten by hand, meats being sliced off in large pieces held between the thumb and two fingers. The sauces were highly seasoned and thick, and heavily flavored mustards were used. Pies were a common banquet item, with the crust serving primarily as a container, rather than as food itself, and it was not until the very end of the Late Middle Ages that the shortcrust pie was developed. Meals often ended with the a dessert, and typically consisted of spiced lumps of hardened sugar or honey, aged cheese and spiced wine, such as hypocras.
English 
Meals in England include: breakfast, elevenses, brunch, lunch, afternoon tea, dinner, and supper. Traditional meals have ancient origins, such as bread and cheese, roasted and stewed meats, meat and game pies, boiled vegetables and broths, and freshwater and saltwater fish.
 

Art, Architecture, and Literature
The 12th century is the century of the Gothic architecture. The strongest influence on architecture directly associated with the Plantagenets is found in designs of kitchens.
From the 11th and 12th centuries on, France was at the center (and often originator) of a vibrant cultural production that extended across Europe, including: the transition of Romanesque architecture to Gothic architecture (originating in 12th-century France) and Gothic art; the foundation of medieval universities (such as the universities of Paris (recognized in 1150), Montpellier (1220), Toulouse (1229), and Orleans (1235)) and the so-called "Renaissance of the 12th century"; a growing body of secular vernacular literature (including the chivalric romance, troubadour and trouvère poetry, etc.) and medieval music (such as the flowering of the Notre Dame school of polyphony from around 1150 to 1250.

Science
French Late Middle Age Scientists
Pope Sylvester II
Around the beginning of the 11th century Pope Sylvester II reintroduced the abacus and armillary sphere, and introduced Arabic numerals and clocks to northern and western Europe.
Jean Buridon
Jean Buridan (1300-58) was a French philosopher and priest. Although he was one of the most famous and influent philosophers of the late Middle Ages, his work today is not renowned by people other than philosophers and historians. One of his most significant contributions to science was the development of the theory of impetus, that explained the movement of projectiles and objects in free-fall. This theory gave way to the dynamics of Galileo Galilei and for Isaac Newton's famous principle of Inertia.
English Late Middle Age Scientists
Technology and science in England advanced considerably during the Middle Ages, driven in part by the Greek and Islamic thinking that reached England from the 12th century onwards. Many advances were made in scientific ideas, including the introduction of Arabic numerals and a sequence of improvements in the units used for measuring time. Clocks were first built in England in the late 13th century, and the first mechanical clocks were certainly being installed in cathedrals and abbeys by the 1320s.

Government and Bureaucracy
The Angevin government was a feudal monarchy and polycratic in nature in its administration. Feudalism was a set of legal and military customs in medieval Europe that flourished between the 9th and 15th centuries. Broadly defined, it was a system for structuring society around relationships derived from the holding of land in exchange for service or labor. In its origin, the feudal grant of land had been seen in terms of a personal bond between lord and vassal, but with time and the transformation of fiefs into hereditary holdings, the nature of the system came to be seen as a form of "politics of land."
 Within that period, some historians identify four distinct Royal Houses: Angevins, Plantagenet, Lancaster and York. The Plantagenets transformed England from a realm ruled from abroad into a sophisticated, politically engaged and independent kingdom, although not necessarily always intentionally. No English dynasty was as successful in passing the crown to a succeeding generation as the Plantagenets from 1189 to 1377. In 1399 the splintering of the dynasty into competing cadet branches, the House of York and House of Lancaster.
In modern day France, the government is headed by the President. It has at its disposal the civil service, government agencies, and the armed forces. In French, the word government can refer to the government as a whole, but typically refers to the group of ministers. The government is responsible to Parliament, and the National Assembly may pass a motion of censure, forcing the resignation of the cabinet. This, in practice, forces the government to be from the same political party or coalition as the majority in the Assembly. Ministers have to answer questions from members of Parliament, both written and oral. In addition, ministers attend meetings of the houses of Parliament when laws pertaining to their areas of responsibility are being discussed.
Traditionally, the government comprises members of three ranks. Ministers are the most senior members of the government; deputy ministers assist ministers in particular areas of their portfolio; ministers of state assist ministers in less important areas, and attend government meetings only occasionally. Before the Fifth Republic, some ministers of particular political importance were called "secretaries of state" the practice has continued under the Fifth Republic in a purely honorific fashion: ministers styled Secretary of State are supposed to be of a higher importance in the government.
In modern day UK since then has gone through significant change to its system of government, with devolved parliaments, assemblies and governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. England, however, remains under the full jurisdiction, on all matters, of the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the UK government as no devolved administration has been created for England within the new structure.

Law
The reign of Henry II is of extreme importance due to the action of the central power, to reforms ordained by the King. This is to suggest that Henry II presided over a revolution in England's system of criminal and civil justice. New laws were enacted, new legal systems were established and the ancient incoherent structure of before was swept away for a new system that was uniform, consistent, common and fair.

Diplomacy
Foreign policy it had none; when its kings passed to Normandy, English chroniclers knew nothing of their doings or their wars. Some little trade was carried on with the nearest lands across the sea, - with Normandy, with Flanders, or with Scandinavia, - but the country was almost wholly agricultural. It was feudal in its social structure, governed by tradition, with little movement of inner life or contact with the world about it.

References
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angevin_empire
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medieval_European_scientists
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Government_of_France
http://historion.net/henry-second/chapter-ii-angevin-empire
http://europeanhistory.about.com/od/europeasawhole/a/The-Angevin-Empire.htm
http://historion.net/henry-second/henry-second


